Docs: Relabel Automatic Redirects as "Incoming links: Best practices and redirects" (Diátaxis) (#9896)
readthedocs/readthedocs.org: docs/user/automatic-redirects.rst

Automatic redirects and incoming links
======================================

Read the Docs makes it easier to create and manage incoming links by redirecting certain URLs automatically.
This article explains the redirects that are automatically active for all Read the Docs projects and how they are useful.
Automatic redirects on Read the Docs are supported long-term.

Redirecting to a page
---------------------

You can link to a specific page and have it redirect to your default version.
This is done with the ``/page/`` URL prefix.

> You can reach this page by going to https://docs.readthedocs.io/page/automatic-redirects.html.

Reviewer: I think that just adds words without saying anything. The original seems clear?

> You can reach this page by going to https://docs.readthedocs.io/page/automatic-redirects.html.

Reviewer 2: Maybe it's a personal thing. I usually find hard to parse "this" when there are many things involved since it depends on the context where it's written and can be ambiguos. In those cases, I tend to replace "this" with the exact thing I want to highlight in that sentence.

> You can reach this page by going to https://docs.readthedocs.io/page/automatic-redirects.html.

Author: I agree with @humitos that "this" can easily get confusing here. So I changed it. Managed to eliminate one word, so Hemingway would hopefully approve :)

This allows you to create links on external sources that are always up to date.

Another way to handle this is the ``latest`` version.
You can set your ``latest`` version to a specific version and just always link to ``latest``.
You can reach this page by going to https://docs.readthedocs.io/en/latest/automatic-redirects.html.

.. seealso::

   :doc:`/versions`
     Read more about how to handle versioned documentation and URL structures.

   :doc:`/user-defined-redirects`
     If you delete or move a page,
     you can setup a redirect in place of the old location and choose where users should be redirected.

Root URL redirect
-----------------

> A link to the root of your documentation will redirect to the *default version*,

Author: I like both suggestions! But they were targeting the same line so I edited your comment to have both suggestions "in one"

as set in your project settings.

This works for both readthedocs.io (|org_brand|), readthedocs-hosted.com (|com_brand|), and :doc:`custom domains </custom-domains>`.

For example::

    docs.readthedocs.io -> docs.readthedocs.io/en/latest/
    www.pip-installer.org -> www.pip-installer.org/en/latest/

.. warning::

   This only works for the root URL, not for internal pages.
   It's designed to redirect people from ``http://pip.readthedocs.io/`` to the default version of your documentation,

>    since serving up a 404 here would be a pretty terrible user experience.

Author: I think this is @ericholscher talking :) I liked it when I read it the first time, so I just left it.. but of course always safer to use neutral language. Let's figure this out some time in the style guide.. it's nice to have some kind of personal touch, but we have to know the _style_.

>    since serving up a 404 here would be a pretty terrible user experience.

Reviewer: Heh yea -- sounds like something I would write :)

.. note::
   If the "develop" branch was designated as the default version,

>    then ``http://pip.readthedocs.io/`` would redirect to ``http://pip.readthedocs.io/en/develop``.

Author: Agreed, gonna fix that.

   But, it's not a universal redirecting solution.
   So, for example, a link to an internal page like
   ``http://pip.readthedocs.io/usage.html`` doesn't redirect to ``http://pip.readthedocs.io/en/latest/usage.html``.

   The reasoning behind this is that RTD organizes the URLs for docs so that multiple translations and multiple versions of your docs can be organized logically and consistently for all projects that RTD hosts.
   For the way that RTD views docs,
   ``http://pip.readthedocs.io/en/latest/`` is the root directory for your default documentation in English, not ``http://pip.readthedocs.io/``.

>    Just like ``http://pip.readthedocs.io/en/develop/`` is the root for your development documentation in English.

Author: Yes, this needs a clarification... let's make some `note::` or `tip::` about this. I'll come up with a suggestion.

Among all the multiple versions of docs,
you can choose which is the "default" version for RTD to display,
which usually corresponds to the git branch of the most recent official release from your project.

Are "permalinks" possible?
--------------------------

You might be familiar with permalinks from blogging.
The idea is that a blog post receives a unique link as soon as it's published and that the link does not change afterward.

> Incoming sources can reference the blog post even though the blog changes structure or the post title changes.

Author: I'm a bit reluctant to include it in our Glossary since we do not have _permalinks_ officially. I don't know if any documentation frameworks support this? I would love if they did, but I wanted to use the term so that people will understand that writing documentation and using a URL path is in some sense the same as creating a permalink.

> Incoming sources can reference the blog post even though the blog changes structure or the post title changes.

Reviewer 2: > I'm a bit reluctant to include it in our Glossary since we do not have permalinks officially 

Describing a term in the glossary does not mean that we officially support it. It helps us to expand the meaning of a word that in the same way through out the whole documentation, to give the user more context without extending the explanation of the word in all the pages.

In the glossary, we can explain things that we don't support at all; but we mention them in our documentation.

> Incoming sources can reference the blog post even though the blog changes structure or the post title changes.

Author: Sounds good! It also aligns with an idea of being "friendly" to readers, i.e. make sure that they feel included when new terms are explained.

When creating an external link to a specific documentation page,
chances are that the page is moved as the documentation changes over time.

How should a permalink look for a documentation project?
Firstly, you should know that a *permalink* does not really exist in documentation but it is the result of careful actions to avoid breaking incoming links.

As a documentation owner,
you most likely want users clicking on incoming links to see the latest version of the page.

Good practice ✅
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

* Use ``/page/path/to/page.html`` if you are linking to the page in the default version of the default language.

> * Use ``/en/latest/path/to/page.html`` if you want to be specific about the language.

Author: That will work well, yes! Good with a reference :sparkle:

> * If you move a page that likely has incoming references, :doc:`create a redirect rule </user-defined-redirects>`.

Author: Maybe we should suggest to use Traffic Analytics to be informed before making decisions to (re)move content.

> * If you move a page that likely has incoming references, :doc:`create a redirect rule </user-defined-redirects>`.

Author: I think we shouldn't write this "bombastically" - it should be possible to move a page without worrying too much. Later we make the point about 404s being useful.

> * If you move a page that likely has incoming references, :doc:`create a redirect rule </user-defined-redirects>`.

Reviewer 2: If we are adding a section about "Good recommendations", I'd say we should recommend to _always_ create a redirect if you change a URL. No matter if there were too many pageviews in the last month(s) or not. You never know where your URL is linked from 😄

* Links from other Sphinx projects should use :doc:`intersphinx </guides/intersphinx>`.

> * Use minimal page slugs that do not attract renaming suggestions.

Author: Yes, that one has a :term: - just need to use it :smile:

> * Use minimal page slugs that do not attract renaming suggestions.

Author: Also fixed!

* When possible,
  keep original file names rather than going for low-impact URL renaming.
  Renaming an article's title is great for the reader and great for SEO,
  but this does not have to involve the URL.

Questionable practice 🟡
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

* Avoid using specific versions in links unless you really mean that users should see that exact version.
  Versions get outdated.
  You can use a :ref:`version warning <versions:Version warning>` to ensure the reader is aware.

> * Keep development versions hidden so people do not find them on search engines by mistake.

Author: Haha, yes, good catch, I must have been trying to write "positive" in a section that should phrase things in a negative way :D

> * Keep development versions hidden so people do not find them on search engines by mistake.

Author: Fixed!

* Avoid using a public ``latest`` for development versions and do not make your *default version* a development branch.
  Publishing development branches can mean that users are reading instructions for unreleased software or draft documentation.

> * Try to get your understanding of ``latest`` and *default version* right from the beginning and ensure you don't change them later on.

Reviewer 2: This also seems to be good advice. I think I'm a little confused about this "Questionable practice" section 🤔

Author: I'll put the end of the section at the beginning :+1:

Author: I moved it to best practice :)

.. tip::

   404 pages are okay!
   If documentation pages have been removed or moved,
   it can make the maintainer of the referring website aware that they need to update their link.
   Users will be aware that the documentation still exist but has changed.

>    The default Read the Docs 404 page is designed to be helpful.
>    You can also design a custom 404 page, see :ref:`hosting:Custom Not Found (404) Pages`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   The default Read the Docs 404 page is designed to be helpful,
   but you can also design your own matching the style of your site, see :ref:`hosting:Custom Not Found (404) Pages`.
```

Shortlinks: rtfd.io
-------------------

> Links to ``readthedocs.io`` are treated the same way as ``readthedocs.io``.

Author: Not sure what happened here :scream: Will fix!

They redirect the root URL to the default version of the project.
They are intended to be easy and short for people to type.

You can reach these docs at https://docs.rtfd.io.

Other top-Level redirects (legacy)
----------------------------------

.. note:: These "implicit" redirects are supported for legacy reasons.
          We will not be adding support for any more magic redirects.
          If you want additional redirects,
          they should live at a prefix like `Redirecting to a Page`_

The main challenge of URL routing in Read the Docs is handling redirects correctly.
Both in the interest of redirecting older URLs that are now obsolete,
and in the interest of handling "logical-looking" URLs (leaving out the lang_slug or version_slug shouldn't result in a 404),
the following redirects are supported::

    /          -> /en/latest/

>     /en/       -> /en/latest/

Author: Oh! I just added "legacy", maybe it's beyond deprecated.

>     /en/       -> /en/latest/

Author: I'd suggest to just remove the whole section then?

>     /en/       -> /en/latest/

Reviewer 2: IMO, removing the whole section for things that don't work anymore as they say it works is 👍🏼

Sources of incoming links vary greatly depending on the type of documentation project that is published.
They can include everything from old emails to GitHub issues, wiki articles, software comments, PDF publications, StackOverflow answers etc.
Most of these incoming sources are either unmanageable or not in your control.

Read the Docs makes it easier to create and manage incoming links by redirecting certain URLs automatically
and giving you access to define your own redirects.

In this article,
we explain how our built-in redirects work and what we consider "best practice" for managing incoming links.

.. seealso::

   :doc:`/versions`
     Read more about how to handle versioned documentation and URL structures.

   :doc:`/user-defined-redirects`
     Overview of all the redirect features available on Read the Docs.
     Many of the redirect features are useful either for building external links or handling requests to old URLs.

   :doc:`/guides/redirects`
     How to add a user-defined redirect, step-by-step.
     Useful if your content changes location!

Best practice: "permalink" your pages
-------------------------------------

> You might be familiar with :term:`permalinks <permalink>` from blogging.

Author: it's a very good article that I used as inspiration for the glossary entry :)

but yeah, I'll trim that entry since it gives the impression that it's a term that RTD has a special definition of.

Good practice ✅
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> * Use `page redirects <user-defined-redirects:Page redirects>`_ if you are linking to the page in the default version of the default language.

Author: :100:

* If you move a page that likely has incoming references, :doc:`create a custom redirect rule </guides/redirects>`.

> * Links from other Sphinx projects should use :doc:`intersphinx </guides/intersphinx>`.

Author: good question... I guess from an author's POV it's a bit of a hard mission to check if incoming sources are using intersphinx.

Seems good to also mention "thou shalt cross-reference other Sphinx projects as thou wanteth other documentation projects to cross-reference your Sphinx project"

Must be better to not live in a glasshouse... also not throw stones actually

> * Links from other Sphinx projects should use :doc:`intersphinx </guides/intersphinx>`.

Author: What I mean is that I think it's cool to also mention tips about how to reference other Sphinx projects in a good way :+1:

* Use minimal page :term:`slugs <slug>` that do not attract renaming suggestions.
* When possible,
  keep original file names rather than going for low-impact URL renaming.
  Renaming an article's title is great for the reader and great for SEO,
  but this does not have to involve the URL.

> * Try to get your understanding of ``latest`` and *default version* right from the beginning and ensure you don't change them later on.

Author: `latest` refers to a URL path, but it's not so clear

Will try with this:

```suggestion
* Establish your understanding of the *latest* and *default version* of your documentation at the beginning. Changing their meaning is very disruptive to incoming links.
```

* Keep development versions hidden so people do not find them on search engines by mistake.

>   Publishing documentation at the wrong URL can be costly if the URL starts circulating.

Author: ```suggestion
  This is the best way to ensure that nobody links to URLs that are intended for development purposes.
```

* Use a :ref:`version warning <versions:Version warning>` to ensure the reader is aware in case they are reading an old (archived) version.

.. tip::

   Using Sphinx?
     If you are using ``:ref:`` for :doc:`cross-referencing </guides/cross-referencing-with-sphinx>`, you may add as many reference labels to a headline as you need,
     keeping old reference labels. This will make refactoring documentation easier and avoid that external projects
     referencing your documentation through :doc:`intersphinx </guides/intersphinx>` break.

Questionable practice 🟡
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> * Avoid using specific versions in links unless you really intend users to see that exact version.

Author: I think the sentence is a bit more cryptic now, but it's shorter :+1:

> * Avoid using specific versions in links unless you really intend users to see that exact version.

Reviewer: Not sure I'd say it's more cryptic, and not sure if this response is sarcasm?

> * Avoid using specific versions in links unless you really intend users to see that exact version.

Author: No, it wasn't. When text is trimmed out, *some* meaning can be lost. In this case, it's about clarifying and spelling out *unless you really intend users to see that exact version*. Because the context is a list of "Questionable practice 🟡", then the idea of spelling out why the practice can be questionable is a bit more in the spotlight :)

When shortening to *unless users need that exact version*, there's the risk that someone doesn't get the meaning."Yes, they should see that version". The overly long sentence was supposed to capture the afterthought.

Maybe not successful, I get that :+1:
